KEP-78: Dynamically reclaiming resources (#331)
kubernetes-sigs/kueue: keps/78-dynamically-reclaiming-resources/README.md

## Summary

This proposal allows Kueue to reclaim the resources of a successfully completed Pod of a Workload even before the whole Workload completes its execution. Freeing the unused resources of a Workload earlier may allow more pending Workloads to be admitted. This will allow Kueue to utilize the existing resources of the cluster much more efficiently.

In the remaining of this document, *Pods of a Workload* means the same as *Pods of a Job* and vice-versa.

## Motivation

Currently, the resources owned by a Job are reclaimed by Kueue only when the whole Job finishes. For Jobs with multiple Pods, the resources will be reclaimed only after the last Pod of the Job finishes. This is not efficient as the Pods of parallel Job may have laggards consuming the unused resources of the Jobs those are currently executing.

### Goals

- Utilize the unused resources of the successfully completed Pods of a running Job.

### Non-Goals

- Preempting a Workload or Pods of a Workload to free resources for a pending Workload.
- Partially admitting a Workload.

## Proposal

Reclaiming the resources of the succeeded Pods of a running Job as soon as the Pod completes its execution.

> We propose to add a new field `.status.ReclaimedPodSets` to the Workload API. `.status.ReclaimedPodSets` is a list that holds the count of successfully completed Pods belonging to a PodSet whose resources have been reclaimed by Kueue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We propose to add a new field `.status.ReclaimedPodSets` to the Workload API. `.status.ReclaimedPodSets` is a list that holds the count of Pods belonging to a PodSet whose resources can be reclaimed by Kueue.
```

as we have seen, completed pods might not directly affect this number.

> Now we will look at the Pod successful completion and failure cases and how Kueue will reclaim the resources in each of the cases.

Reviewer: Maybe add a subtitle saying that this is specific to v1.Job

### Pod Failure Cases

#### RestartPolicy of Pods as Never

Whenever a Pod of a Job fails, the Job will recreate a Pod as replacement against the failed Pod. The Job will continue this process of creating new Pods until the Job reaches its `backoffLimit`(by default the backoffLimit is `6`). The newly created Pod against the failed Pod will reuse the resources of the failed Pod. Once the Job reaches its `backoffLimit` and does not have the required successful `.spec.completions` count, the Job is termed as a `Failed` Job. When the Job is marked as failed, no more Pods would be created by the Job. So, the remaining owned resources of the Job will be reclaimed by queue. 

#### RestartPolicy of Pods as OnFailure

When the Pods of the Job have `.spec.template.spec.restartPolicy = "OnFailure"`, the failed Pod stays on the node and the failed container within the Pod is restarted. The Pod might run indefinitely or get marked as `Failed` after the `.spec.activeDeadlineSeconds` is completed by Job if specified. In this case also, Kueue won't reclaim the resources of the Job until the Job gets completed as either `Failed` or `Succeeded`.

> Hence, as seen from the above discussed Pod failure cases, we conclude that the Pods of a Job which fail during its execution, its resources are not immediately reclaimed by Kueue. Only when the Job gets marks as `Failed`, the resources of failed Pods will be reclaimed by Kueue.

Reviewer: Maybe put this paragraph under `Pod Failure Cases`, as it resumes both scenarios.

> ## API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### API
```

A new field `ReclaimedPodSets` is added to the `.status` of Workload API.

```go
// WorkloadStatus defines the observed state of Workload
type WorkloadStatus struct {
    // conditions hold the latest available observations of the Workload
    // current state.
    // +optional
    // +listType=map
    // +listMapKey=type
    Conditions []WorkloadCondition `json:"conditions,omitempty"`

    // list of count of Pods of a PodSet with resources reclaimed
    // +optional

>     ReclaimedPodSets []ReclaimedPodSetPods `json:"reclaimedPodSets"`

Reviewer: what about `podSetsReclaims`?

"reclaimed pod sets" sounds like we are reclaiming the entire pod set.

}

// ReclaimedPodSetPod defines the PodSet name and count of successfully completed Pods 
// belonging to the PodSet whose resources can be reclaimed.
type ReclaimedPodSet struct{
    Name string
    Count int
}
```

> ## Implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Implementation
```

> Kueue's job reconciler will compare the Job's `.status.Succeeded` field and the Workload's `.status.reclaimedPodSets[i].count` field value. If the former value is greater than the later then, Kueue's Job reconciler will update the Workload object's `.status`. Workload reconciler will catch the update event of Kueue Job reconciler and release the resources of the newly succeeded Pods to the ClusterQueue depending upon the case the Job satisfies discussed in the section of [successful Pod completion](#pod-successful-completion-cases).

Reviewer: we don't need to repeat the formula, but the first sentence of this paragraph seems to contradict what you said in the analysis above.

Or maybe I'm not understanding your proposal. I think all the calculations will have to be in the job controller. The workload controller already has the curated number of reclaimable pods to update the ClusterQueues usage.

Author: > we don't need to repeat the formula, but the first sentence of this paragraph seems to contradict what you said in the analysis above.

In the analysis above, comparison of values of Job's `.spec.parallelism` and it's remaining completion count (**M**) is explained, and at what condition in future the resources will reclaimed by Kueue. Here, in the first sentence, I'm trying to say that, if the mentioned values differ, then workload object will be updated. And the actual cases where the decision to reclaim or not will be taken by workload reconciler when it recieves an update event from job reconciler.

> I think all the calculations will have to be in the job controller. The workload controller already has the curated number of reclaimable pods to update the ClusterQueues usage.

What I have assumed is, during the handling of update event of workload by its reconciler, old and new workloads objects are available. 

1. Calculate the difference in the count of `.status.podSetReclaims` of  old and new workload object.
2. Check the job parallelism and remaining completion values (Here a GET call to fetch Job will be required).
3. Calculate the effective count of pods to reclaim and update cache.

I see the issue with my implementation approach here. There could be inconsistency in Job's remaining completion value.

What you have said on having all calculations in job controller seems the correct to me now. But, I see one challenge while releasing the resources from workload reconciler. How should the Job reconciler convey the effective count of Pods to be reclaimed to workload reconciler. As the workload reconciler has a cache object and the Job reconciler does not.
Can having cache object as a part of job reconciler correct in this case?

Reviewer: The job controller doesn't need access to the cache (and it shouldn't have).

The job controller can simply write into the workload status how many pods can be reclaimed.

The workload controller observes that change and updates the cache.

## Testing Plan

Dynamically reclaiming resources enhancement has unit and integration tests. These tests
are run regularly as a part of Kueue's prow CI/CD pipeline.

### Unit Tests

> All the Kueue's core components must be covered by unit tests.  Here is a list of unit tests required for the modules of the feature:

Reviewer: We might also need unit tests in the job controller. But we can decide that later, given that all tests are currently at integration level.

* [Cluster-Queue cache tests](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/main/pkg/cache/cache_test.go)
* [Workload tests](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/main/pkg/workload/workload_test.go)

### Integration tests
* Kueue Job Controller

>   - Checking the resources owned by a Job are released to the cache and clusterQueue when a Pod of the Job succeed.

Reviewer: this sounds like a test for the workload controller.

  - Integration tests for Job controller are [found here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/main/test/integration/controller/job/job_controller_test.go).

* Workload Controller

>   - Should update the `.spec.reclaimedPodSets` of a Workload when a Pod of a Job succeeds.

Reviewer: this sounds like a test for kueue job controller

    - [Unit Tests](#unit-tests)
    - [Integration tests](#integration-tests)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

This proposal allows Kueue to reclaim the resources of a successfully completed Pod of a Workload even before the whole Workload completes its execution. Freeing the unused resources of a Workload earlier may allow more pending Workloads to be admitted. This will allow Kueue to utilize the existing resources of the cluster much more efficiently.

In the remaining of this document, *Pods of a Workload* means the same as *Pods of a Job* and vice-versa.

## Motivation

Currently, the resources owned by a Job are reclaimed by Kueue only when the whole Job finishes. For Jobs with multiple Pods, the resources will be reclaimed only after the last Pod of the Job finishes. This is not efficient as the Pods of parallel Job may have laggards consuming the unused resources of the Jobs those are currently executing.

### Goals

- Utilize the unused resources of the successfully completed Pods of a running Job.

### Non-Goals

- Preempting a Workload or Pods of a Workload to free resources for a pending Workload.

> - Partially admitting a Workload.

Reviewer 2: No, I mean https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/331#discussion_r991784771

But what you said can also be added.

> - Partially admitting a Workload.

Author: > Do you mean excluding support for APIs that are not batch/v1.Job? If so, I'm ok with that

Yes, currently resource reclaim feature is limited to kubernetes native `Job` API. For jobs of other types, reclaiming of resources would be dependent on the design of those particular jobs.

> Maybe also add `Supporting variety reclaiming policies`.

I suppose, we can think about when we add support for other Job types such `MPIJob`, `Argo/Tekton workflows`, etc

> - Partially admitting a Workload.

Reviewer: Then please add to non-goals

## Proposal

Reclaiming the resources of the succeeded Pods of a running Job as soon as the Pod completes its execution.

We propose to add a new field `.status.ReclaimedPodSetPods` to the Workload API. Workload controller will be responsible for updating the field `.status.ReclaimedPodSetPods` according to the status of the Workload's Pods.

`.status.ReclaimedPodSetPods` is a list that holds the count of successfully completed Pods belonging to a PodSet whose resources have been reclaimed by Kueue.

Now we will look at the Pod failure cases and how the reclaiming of resources by Kueue will happen.

### Pod Successful Completion Cases

#### Job Parallelism Equal To 1

By default, the `.spec.parallelism` of Job is equal to `1`.  In this case, if the Pod completes with successful execution, the whole Job execution can be considered as a success. Hence, the resource associated with the Job will be reclaimed by Kueue after the Job completion. This functionality is present today as well and no change will be required.

> #### Job Parallelism Greater Than 1

Reviewer: Note that parallelism is not the same as completions.

Did you analyze the case where parallelism=N and completions=M, where N<M?

If a pod finishes successfully, it doesn't necessarily mean that the job controller won't create another one for it.

Author: The remaining completions of a job will reduce by one when its pod will finish successfully. I think, we should reclaim the resources of a successful pod when the job's parallelism is greater or equal to the remaining job completions value. In this way, we can also generalize this approach to applicable in any scenario for reclaiming the resources of a successful pod of a job .

@alculquicondor @kerthcet  let me know your comments on this. Just don't want to directly jump on writing the approach.

Reviewer: let's say parallelism=3 and completions=5.
When 1 pod finishes (let's sayindex 0), there should still be 3 running pods (indexes 1, 2, 3)
When 3 pods finish, then there would only be 2 running pods (indexes 3, 4).

Is this what you mean?

Author: What you have explained is correct. That's what I meant. 

I shouldn't have said Job's parallelism greater than it's completions. Rather, as we see from the above scenario you have explained, when indexes 3 & 4 remain(rather 2, 3 & 4 remain, consider 0 &1 completed for simplicity), now remaining completions of Job is not greater than the possible Job's parallelism. After this point in the Job's lifetime, Kueue can start to reclaim the resources of the Pod which completes successfully.

When the Pods of the Job have `.spec.template.spec.restartPolicy = "OnFailure"`, the failed Pod stays on the node and the failed container within the Pod is restarted. The Pod might run indefinitely or get marked as `Failed` after the `.spec.activeDeadlineSeconds` is completed by Job if specified. In this case also, Kueue won't reclaim the resources of the Job until the Job gets completed as either `Failed` or `Succeeded`.

Hence, as seen from the above discussed Pod failure cases, we conclude that the Pods of a Job which fail during its execution, its resources are not immediately reclaimed by Kueue. Only when the Job gets marks as `Failed`, the resources of failed Pods will be reclaimed by Kueue.

## API

A new field `ReclaimedPodSetPods` is added to the `.status` of Workload API.

```go
// WorkloadStatus defines the observed state of Workload
type WorkloadStatus struct {
    // conditions hold the latest available observations of the Workload
    // current state.
    // +optional
    // +listType=map
    // +listMapKey=type
    Conditions []WorkloadCondition `json:"conditions,omitempty"`

    // list of count of Pods of a PodSet with resources reclaimed
    // +optional

>     ReclaimedPodSetPods []ReclaimedPodSetPods `json:"reclaimedPodSetPods"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ReclaimedPodSets []ReclaimedPodSetPods `json:"reclaimedPodSets"`
```

This name might be enough

}

// ReclaimedPodSetPods defines the PodSet name and count of successfully completed Pods 

> // belonging to the PodSet whose resources have been reclaimed by Kueue

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// belonging to the PodSet whose resources can be reclaimed.
```

> type ReclaimedPodSetPods struct{

Author: Done

    Name string
    Count int
}
```

#### ReclaimedPodSetPods

> `.status.reclaimedPodSetPods` is a list where each element of the list denotes the count of Pods of the Workload w.r.t PodSet whose resources have been reclaimed by Kueue. The structure consists of two fields - `Name` denotes the name of PodSet and `Count` denotes the count of Pods belonging to the `Name` PodSet.

Reviewer: This is already explained above, so no need to repeat it.

Author: Removed

## Implementation

> The workload reconciler will keep a watch(or `Watches()`) on the Job's `.status.succeeded` field. The Workload reconciler will calculate the difference between the Job's `.status.succeeded` field and Workload's `.status.reclaimedPodSetPods[i].count` field for every PodSet of the workload. With the former value being greater than the later, Kueue will reclaim the resources of the excess succeeded Pods.

Reviewer: The workload reconciler doesn't watch Job.

Did you mean the job reconciler?

Shouldn't `count` be updated based on `succeeded`? Although, it's unclear what to do when `parallelism != completions`

Author: I meant Job CR only.

Yes, will rethink for the case where `parallelism != completions`

Reviewer 2: > The workload reconciler doesn't watch Job.

+ 1, or it will be too heavy for workload controller and coupled with Jobs.

## Testing Plan

Dynamically reclaiming resources enhancement has unit and integration tests. These tests
are run regularly as a part of Kueue's prow CI/CD pipeline.

### Unit Tests

All the Kueue's core components must be covered by unit tests.  Here is a list of unit tests required for the modules of the feature:

* [Cluster-Queue cache tests](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/main/pkg/cache/cache_test.go)
* [Workload tests](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/main/pkg/workload/workload_test.go)

### Integration tests
* Kueue Job Controller
  - checking the resources owned by a Job are released to the cache and clusterQueue when a Pod of the Job succeed.
  - Integration tests for Job controller are [found here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/main/test/integration/controller/job/job_controller_test.go).

* Workload Controller

>   - A pending Workload should be admitted when enough resources are available after release of resources by the succeeded Pods of the parallel Jobs.

Reviewer: these tests don't have the scheduler running, so you couldn't verify this here.

Author: Removed

  - Should update the `.spec.reclaimedPodSetPods` of a Workload when a Pod of a Job succeeds.
  - Integration tests for Workload Controller are [found here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/main/test/integration/controller/core/workload_controller_test.go).

* Scheduler
  - Checking if a Workload gets admitted when an active parallel Job releases resources of completed Pods.
  - Integration tests for Scheduler are [found here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/main/test/integration/scheduler/scheduler_test.go).

## Implementation History

Dynamically Reclaiming Resources are tracked as part of [enhancement#78](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/78).

> **TODO** - Add proposal link

Reviewer: this line can be removed now, right?

Author: Removed
